#summary How to use UCLA pygr XMLRPC server and downloadable resources

*WARNING*: This is a code-example Wiki page and as such _may_ be out of sync with current versions of Pygr. It will be removed or refactored once our doctest infrastructure has been deployed.


One can easily download pre-built pygr.Data resources into your localdisk. Be sure to give writable path before XMLRPC server ('.' in PYGRDATAPATH).

  * import os
  * os.environ['PYGRDATAPATH'] = '.,http://biodb2.bioinformatics.ucla.edu:5000'
  * import pygr.Data

  * pygr.Data.dir('') # RETURNS ALL XMLRPC RESOURCES
  * pygr.Data.dir('', download=True) # RETURNS ALL DOWNLOADABLE RESOURCES

For seqdb.BlastDB, you have to setup PYGRDATADOWNLOAD path.

  * os.environ['PYGRDATADOWNLOAD'] = '/my/seqdb/path'

  * hg18 = pygr.Data.Bio.Seq.Genome.HUMAN.hg18(download=True)

Above line will initiate downloading and saving hg18 into your PYGRDATADOWNLOAD path.

For NLMSA, you have to setup PYGRDATABUILDDIR path..

  * os.environ['PYGRDATABUILDER'] = '/my/nlmsa/path'

  * hg18_multiz28way = pygr.Data.Bio.MSA.UCSC.hg18_multiz28way(download=True)

Above line will initiate downloading and saving hg18_multiz28way into your PYGRDATABUILDER path.

If you don't have huge disk space, don't forget to delete intermediate compressed files and text files.

Of course, if you delete download=True option, it will access biodb2 XMLRPC resourcese.

  * hg18 = pygr.Data.Bio.Seq.Genome.HUMAN.hg18()
  * hg18_multiz28way = pygr.Data.Bio.MSA.UCSC.hg18_multiz28way()